---
title: Blog Reboot
created_at: Fri Jan 14 13:11:26 -0500 2011
kind: article
summary: It's been nearly a year since I've added anything to this site. There are a few reasons for that, though for now I'll only mention that I didn't like that the site existed in part to sell an iphone app and possibly future apps. Well, it turns out that I don't really care about overtly selling stuff. What I really want is a place to write about the pursuits I care about most.
---

It's been nearly a year since I've added anything to this site. There are a few reasons for that, though for now I'll only mention that I didn't like that the site existed in part to sell an iphone app and possibly future apps. Well, it turns out that I don't really care about selling stuff. What I really want is a place to write about I care about most.

And that might make this site kinda weird. I plan on writing about design, programming, aikido, buddhism, communication, and a host of other topics which aren't usually seen rubbing elbows. The thread which wends its way through all these topics is love.

With design, I'll share my attempts at creating layouts and interfaces which are a joy to use. With programming, I'll share the code I've written, and hopefully it will help other folks. With aikido and buddhism, I'll probably just share my thoughts on what I've read and practiced. My obsession with communication will probably be evident in most things I write, and it is, after all, why I want to write anything in the first place.

So that's what this site is for. Not to sell or persuade, but just to share the things I love.
