---
title: bcj personal note
created_at: Sun May 23 2021 15:34:00 -0500
kind: article
draft: true
categories: programming
summary: "I've re-written jobs.braveclojure.com to create the best possible Clojure job board."
---

### Draft 1
I started working on this rewrite around the same time that the pandemic
started. The sudden economic uncertainty hit me hard: I was personally ok, but
so many across the US -- including some of my own friends -- had to grapple with
now knowing how they would pay for basic necessities.

I'm grateful that I had security, and that I could even help others. My life
hasn't always been like this. I grew up poor. During my earliest years my family
was on welfare. We were homeless for a time, and lived in government housing for
years before finally moving into a very modest house. Later, at 18, I was on my
own, working overnight at a hotel and doing the dance of juggling expenses to
incur the fewest overdraft fees.

Learning to program gave me access to opportunities that changed my life. Those
early circumstances are now far behind me, but they've never left me, and I
continue to feel motivated to do what I can to help others improve their
conditions. My life got better because of the generosity of others; the tools I
use daily are the product of labor freely given. I want my labor to prove
useful, too. I believe in the power of generosity to have a lasting impact on
others, to benefit them across time in ways we don't even know. It's why I wrote
my book and insisted on keeping it freely available online: I wanted to make it
easier for people to learn a skill so that they too could have better
opportunities. This site is another expression of that desire to help people
make a good living.

I continue to receive incredible gifts. Two years ago Nubank invited me to give
a talk at the first ever Clojure/South. They paid for everything, they flew me
down and put me up in a nice hotel and even let me get on a stage and talk to
people. On purpose! It was one of the highlights of my career, and honestly, my
life: the memories of that trip -- of crashing a bar in São Paulo at like 3am
with a bunch of Clojurians and cheering as one of us somehow finagled the guitar
off the guy who was supposed to be singing to sing a couple tunes of their own
-- are memories I will always cherish.

We do what we can with what we have. I have some programming skills, I sometimes
have free time, and I hope that this little contribution to the Clojure
ecosystem helps some people out.


### Draft 2
Learning to program gave me access to opportunities that changed my life. I grew
up poor; those early circumstances are now far behind me, but they've never left
me, and I continue to feel motivated to do what I can to help others improve
their conditions. My life got better because of the generosity of others. The
tools I use daily are the product of labor freely given. I want my labor to
prove useful, too. I believe in the power of generosity to have a lasting impact
on others, to provide benefit across time in ways we don't even realize. It's
why I wrote my book and insisted on keeping it freely available online: I wanted
to make it easier for people to learn a skill so that they too could have better
opportunities. This site is another expression of that desire to help people
make a good living.

I continue to receive incredible gifts. Two years ago Nubank invited me to give
a talk at the first ever Clojure/South. They paid for everything, they flew me
down and put me up in a nice hotel and even let me get on a stage and talk to
people. On purpose! It was one of the highlights of my career, and honestly, my
life: the memories of that trip -- of crashing a bar in São Paulo at like 3am
with a bunch of Clojurians and cheering as one of us somehow finagled the guitar
off the guy who was supposed to be singing to sing a couple tunes of their own
-- are memories I will always cherish.

We do what we can with what we have. I have some programming skills, I sometimes
have free time, and I hope that this little contribution to the Clojure
ecosystem helps some people out.

### Draft 3

The ingenuity and generosity of the Clojure community continues to inspire me.
It feels like we're riding an exciting new wave of innovation, with projects
like [babashka](https://github.com/babashka/babashka),
[clip](https://github.com/juxt/clip), [crux](https://github.com/juxt/crux) and
dozens more expanding the boundaries of what's possible.

It's because of this kind of generosity that I'm able to make a good living and 
