---
title: Clojure Conj 2014
created_at: Sat Nov 22
kind: article
categories: penguins
summary: "The Conj was a blast. So many thank yous!"
---

This year's Clojure Conj was a complete blast! I got to meet and
reconnect with great, friendly, brilliant people, and had enormous fun
the whole time. And by the way - if you were hoping to get a sticker,
please email me at
[daniel@flyingmachinestudios.com](mailto:daniel@flyingmachinestudios.com)
and let me know how I can get one to you!

The main thing I want to say is THANK YOU SO MUCH to everyone who went
out of their way to share their appreciation for Clojure for the Brave
and True; I know how easy it is to feel nervous about approaching a
stranger! The book is a labor of love, an earnest attempt at both
expressing myself creatively and bringing joy to others through
entertainment and education, and it is immensely gratifying to hear
that my efforts are paying off. Putting myself out there over and over
with each chapter and revision is nervewracking as hell, but y'all
really make me feel like it's worth it. I have to admit, though, that
I'm finding it hard to adjust back to normal life. Why aren't the
other people waiting in this airport with me coming up and thanking
me? Don't they know who I am!?!?

Second, I'm grateful to Alex Miller
([@puredanger](http://twitter.com/puredanger)), Cognitect, and all of
the excellent speakers for creating such a great experience for
everyone. Send them your thanks, and go watch the talks at
[the ClojureTV YouTube channel](https://t.co/0YyJNkC6lH).

Now, normally I try to write stuff that's useful for readers, but the
rest of this post is essentially fanboi raving because OMG I got to
meet Bozhidar Batsov! Bozhidar is both the Emacs Knight we need and
the one we deserve, and holy crap I got a private
[CIDER](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider) lesson from
him. Expect an article on all the cool CIDER features you're not using
in the near future.

Other fanboi highlights:

* Getting to real-life meet Mike Marsh, one of the most prolific
  posters on [Grateful Place](http://www.gratefulplace.com) and a
  thoughtful, smart, and genuine good guy.
* Meeting Brian Jennings, the man responsible for Emacs 24.4's
  lose-focus hooks. He gets about a million geek points for persuading
  the Emacs team, including and especially RMS, that the feature was a
  good idea. How cool is that?
* Totally bombing one of my programming jokes with a Clojure
  Olympian. That gets me geek points, right? Right? Eh? Eh?
* Hearing about a cool swarm intelligence project from a college
  hacker, Anthony, who also happens to be an awesome dude
* Spending time with Isaac Praveen and the rest of the Sparx
  team. Thanks for the drink, and thanks for the company! These guys
  are doing cool stuff and they are hiring Clojure devs.
* Meeting Angela Harms and Jason, my new Buddha buddies. I'm expecting
  to see a lot of cool stuff at [Maitria](http://maitria.com/).
* Talking to [Johann Bestowrous (@opinionsonline)](@opinionsonline) -
  do yourself a big favor and follow him on twitter
* Getting a sneak peek at the next version of Hostel Rocket. These
  guys are also hiring Clojure Devs, and they have a really cool
  product.

It was great hanging out with folks, and I hope everybody had a safe
trip home!
