---
title: No Violence
created_at: Jun 22 17:16:00 -0500 2016
kind: article
summary: summary
draft: true
---

"I hope you had a good time and consider your mother is dead and gone
now," read the email I received from my mom the day after I got
married.

She was supposed to be in Santa Fe with me and wife, but two days
earlier - the day before our wedding - her plane got delayed and then
cancelled. She had called when that happened. While I tried to look up
alternative flights from nearby airports, she angrily accused me of
being selfish and not loving her. (I can still remember the tone of
her voice, a low hiss that held nothing but contempt.) When I told her
we could find another plane to get her there in time for the wedding
she asked, sarcastically, "What's the point?" (We had this
conversation while my wife and I were at the county clerk's office to
get our marriage license. I would excuse myself to talk in the hallway
so no one else would be able to hear my mom.) The last time I heard
from her was a couple months later, when she texted me out of the blue
from an airport: "My plane is delayed, but you don't care."

I'm still working through these final lessons in rage and violence,
despair and guilt, imparted to me by mom. And though I haven't talked
to my dad in more than a decade, he, too, has left me a lifetime's
instruction. Long ago I found writing to be useful in integrating
these kinds of events, so I'm once again picking up the tools I've
found for growing joy out of so much shit.

This is my attempt to work the raw pain of my family's history of
violence into a shape that makes sense. This is my story of how I've
come to commit myself to the ideal of nonviolence and to believe that
the only way to stay sane is to love as many people as you can as hard
as you can for as long as you can.

----

My mom, Vietnamese, grew up in Vietnam during its war with America and
had many encounters with its impersonal brutality: once, walking home,
she found her best friend's dead body, a bullet hole in the head. At
night she would hear bombs exploding. Perhaps just as damaging was the
violence at home: parents, uncles, and aunts, who would treat her as a
kind of house servant, hit her head, call her names, critize, rarely
show love.

My brother and I felt the echoes of those blows growing up. We felt
them in the constant threat that mom would fly into a rage, screaming
and hitting us. She would lose control in public, alternately berating
us and crying in front of friends, parents, and teachers. She once
left the house after telling us she regretted we'd been born; she was
gone for hours, leaving us uncertain if she would come back. She once
drove me to a Wal-Mart parking lot and told me she should just go
inside and buy a gun and kill herself (I was fourteen).

There is more -- obviously, of course -- but recounting it all would
serve no purpose. Violence broke my mom, and my mom in turn broke us.
When a child grows up in a chaotic environment, not knowing when they
will receive affection or rage, they internalize the belief that they
must somehow be defective and that that's what makes their parents
treat them that way. And that's what happened to me and my
brother. (It didn't help that we grew up in Christian churches where
we were told, and I believed, that we were stained, unworthy sinners
by nature.)

For me, the result was entering into a long term relationship where I
took care of someone with a long term illness, spending innumerable
hours in hospitals or administering medication, all the while being
criticized, screamed at, and told I wasn't loving
enough. Increasingly, I found myself responding in kind, with day-long
shout-fests ending in me crying for hours, only for the cycle to begin
again the next day. Toward the end, I would spend most mornings
sitting at my desk and just staring into space thinking that I knew I
didn't want to kill myself, that I just wanted my life to
change. Alternating between rage and tears, suicidal thoughts: my
black hair and tan skin weren't the only things I'd inherited from my
mom.

One thing that kept me sane was a steady diet of books (starting in
adolsence) that affirmed the untouchable goodness at the core of every
human and possibility of joy in this life. Books like Jonathan
Livingston Seagull, The Glass Bead Game, and One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's nest became my personal canon. I also had the practice of
aikido, a martial art grounded in a philosophy of love for all
humanity - including oneself. I still remember talking to a seminar
instructor about the idea of seeing our partners as gifts, and crying
when he told me "Remember that you are also a gift to them."

Most significant were two experiences I had when I was thirteen. My
first girlfriend's mom, apropos of nothing, told me "Daniel, you are
wonderful." It was the first time I had been told that. On another
day, her dad dropped me off at my home. He'd seen some of how my mom
had treated me. Before I got out, he said, "Daniel, don't ever take
shit from anybody. You're a good person, and you don't deserve it." I
held those memories tight.

What finally
And then I discovered the
concept of "toxic shame," the internalized belief that one is
fundamentally a bad, unlovable person.
