---
title: My Writing Process
created_at: Mon Aug 22 18:00:00 -0500 2016
kind: article
summary: "Some notes on how I write that I hope will be useful to aspiring authors"
---

The letter below is a response to an email from a Twitter friend. For
context: I've written some instructional material that's enjoyed
success online, including
[_Clojure for the Brave and True_](http://braveclojure.com) and
[_Clean Up Your Mess: A Guide to Visual Design for Everyone_](http://visualmess.com). Robert
asked me a few questions about my process.

Hi Robert!

You're in the unfortunate position of being my permission to write at
length about my creative process without seeming completely self
indulgent: someone's actually _interested_ in listening to me describe
the chaos between my ears! Be prepared to read way more than you asked
for.

## _How do you decide who you are writing for?_

_This one’s key for me. When I’ve written in the past, I’ve struggled
with knowing how much or how little to say. I’m curious to learn how
you deal with that._

First: I've found it useful to follow the standard advice and pick an
individual or two and write for them. The argument goes that you'll
find it much easier to choose words and have a consistent tone, and
that's proven true for me.

When I wrote _Clean Up Your Mess_, I was one of three programmers
working in an office full of charming people who did business analysis
for management consultants, and I wrote the guide for a couple of them
that I had become friends with. These analysts produced powerpoint
decks by the barrel, and every single one was ugly. Similarly,
_Clojure for the Brave and True_ started as a guide for a couple
coworkers that I was mentoring.

However, picking your audience is only half the process. The other
half is picking _who the author is_. I'm going to go on a bit of a
tangent to explain this.

When I started writing _Clean Up Your Mess_, my personal life was a
mess. In hopes of making it less messy I had been spending most of my
free time reading Buddhist literature and listening to lectures by
Thich Nhat Hanh and Pema Chodron (in fact, my site opens with a Thich
Nhat Hanh quote). I was spending a great deal of time meditating and
reflecting. (You're interested in Buddhism too, right?)

One of the ideas that really grabbed me was that our self-conceptions
are just stories we tell ourselves with no reality to them. I won't
belabor the point here; suffice to say that I found it useful and
powerful to be able to perceive my identity as a construct as
ephemeral as smoke.

Around the same time, I started taking improv comedy classes, where I
would spend two hours a week constantly coming up with new, unique
characters and living in them for a few minutes at a time. When you're
sold on the idea that your day-to-day _you_ is itself just a
character, improv becomes way easier and more fun. It's also fun to do
this in real life - like, recently my wife and I were at the grocery
store and I decided my character was "Super Excited About Carrots
Guy", and I started shouting "OH MY GAWD JESS CARROTS! THEY HAVE
CARROTS JESS!  CARROTS!" Everyone was laughing as they escorted me
out!

Anyway, during this time of buddhism and improv I was writing _Clean
Up Your Mess_ and when I sat down to write I got to play with new
identities, new characters, and see which was the most fun. It became
much easier to find words and keep a consistent tone when I decided on
the author's character.

So, you mentioned not knowing how much or how little to write. Knowing
your character helps. In _Clojure for the Brave and True_, one of my
editors would sometimes whittle down sentences to the bone, leaving
only pure information; I would undo those edits with gusto, adding
back the shape and texture of the author's voice.

There's another aspect of writing instructional material, which is
that 95% of the time you can take more time to explain something. Even
if you're writing for experienced audiences, at least take the time to
explain acronyms and jargon.

## How often and how much do you write?

Not enough and not enough! Writing was easiest, however, when I had a
consistent schedule of writing at least one hour every single day.

Let me tell you about my garage. My garage is a living f*cking
nightmare. It's like Cthulhu and the dread of the dark you had as a
child made disgusting love and produced a horde of horrors that died
in giant filthy clumps all over. At the beginning of the year I
suppressed my gag reflex long enough to clean it out with the goal of
setting up a photo studio, which I did, only to let it sit for three
months. So three months later I go in there to actually take photos
and guess what: it's a compolete horror show, again!

If I had only spent time every day or even every week maintaining it,
I'm sure it would have been much easier to keep clean. If I had
cleaned it out, all those tiny insect monsters wouldn't have been able
to breed, there wouldn't have been two dozen spider egg sacs, etc.

When I don't write consistently it's like that. I have to crawl into
the nest of _no one cares what you write_ and _this time everyone's
going to hate it_ called my mind and clear it all out before I can
actually start writing.

When I write consistently, on the other hand, it's actually quite
pleasant!

One more note: much of the writing process is research. Every time I
find myself struggling to explain something, it's because I don't
understand it well enough. When that happens I put down the keyboard
and pull out the pen and notebook. I try to articulate the questions
that will lead me to understand what I want to explain. I read and I
draw diagrams and play with words until I feel like I understand the
concept.

Becoming aware that, for me, writer's block is a lack of
understanding, has helped me be much more productive.

## Collaboration

### Who does your drawings?

My wife! She's pretty great.

### Do you have someone who edits for you?

I did when I worked with No Starch. They were awesome! _Clojure for
the Brave and True_ is much, much better because they kept pushing me
to write more clearly and explain things more fully. For other
projects, I'll ask friends to look at drafts.

### How much does it cost?

I paid my wife in carrots. **OH MY GAWD JESS THEY HAVE CARROTS!**

No Starch gets 85% of hard copy sales and 77.5% of ebook sales (or
something like that).

I hope this was helpful!
