---
title: "Encouraging Programmers to Learn Visual Design"
created_at: May 23, 2012
kind: article
categories: design
summary: "A talk I gave: Why you might want to learn more about visual design and how it's pretty similar to what you already know as programmers."
---

Encouraging Programmers to Learn Visual Design
===

Below is a talk I was asked to give at work.

***

In any case, I'm going to talk about why you might want to learn more
about visual design and how it's pretty similar to what you already
know as programmers.

From a professional perspective, you won't necessarily advance your
career by learning visual design. Programmers have done fine without
knowing about design. So why should you care?

I think that visual design is worth knowing because it enriches your
life. You see the world in a different way, and you learn to
communicate more expressively.

Design is everywhere. It's everywhere! And in design is someone's
attempt to communicate with you or to affect you. I mean, we're in New
York City. Walk one city block and you'll be inundated with design.
This is an entire language being spoken around you, and you can learn
to understand it.

Learning design gives you more tools to be expressive, creative.
Probably many of you had this experience when you learned Ruby. This
is so great - I can go from idea to implementation in a way that's
more elegant, more beautiful.

Wait. More elegant? More beautiful? Those sound like design terms to
me. The truth is - most programmers shy away from visual design
because of what they see as its subjective nature. Its aesthetic
nature, I should say. When you're doing visual design, you're
concerned with the viewer's aesthetic experience.

But aren't we concerned with aesthetics in programming, too? Don't we
strive to create beautiful code? Matz designed Ruby to maximize
programmer joy, for crying out loud. And if you look closer, there are
more similarities.

In both visual design and software design you care about frustration.
In visual design, you care about reducing the frustration of your
users and you do this by supporting their visual brains. You use
techniques that allow users to easily digest the information you're
communicating. You use existing patterns like buttons and top
navigation.

In software design, you care about reducing the frustration of the
people who have to use and maintain your code and you do this through
your use of language and, sometimes, diagrams. You try to name things
well and use existing patterns like Decorator or Observer or
Singleton.

So you're actually not too far from speaking the language of visual
design. What you're missing is the vocabulary and the experience.
There are plenty of resources out there to help you develop your
vocabulary, of which my site Clean Up Your Mess is one. What remains
is for you to gain experience, to try to design things yourself.

I hope this talk encourages you to do this. I think you'll find that
learning design brings you rewards beyond your job, beyond web
development. You'll find that it opens up more of the world to you.
You'll find that you've become part of a conversation that has been
going on for centuries.
